--- PAGE 0 ---
First International Symposium on Marine Propulsors
smp’09, Trondheim, Norway, June 2009
Propulsion Control Strategies for Fixed Pitch Propellers at Low
Advance Speed
Asgeir J. Sørensen1, Øyvind Smogeli2 and Eivind Ruth3
1Department of Marine Technology, NTNU, Trondheim, Norway
2Marine Cybernetics, Tiller, Norway
3Det Norske Veritas, Høvik, Norway
ABSTRACT
Positioning control systems for marine vessels include dif-
ferent control functions for station-keeping, maneuvering,
and transit operations by means of proper action of the
propulsion system. This paper presents an overview of the
various propulsion control strategies for ﬁxed pitch pro-
peller (FPP) at low advance number based on thruster shaft
speed, torque, and power control. It can be shown that
signiﬁcant reduction in power and torque ﬂuctuations can
be achieved in waves. In high seas, however, when the
propeller may be subject to large thrust losses due to ven-
tilation and in-and-out-of-water effects, torque and power
thruster control will lead to propeller racing. To facilitate
use of torque and power control also in high seas, an anti-
spin thruster controller is proposed.
1
INTRODUCTION
Electrical propulsion has during the last decade become the
preferred solution for offshore vessels, cruise and passen-
ger ships. This opens up for new control solutions combin-
ing the disciplines of hydrodynamics, electrical power, and
control engineering. The real-time control hierarchy of a
marine control system may be divided into three levels: the
guidance system, the high-level plant control (e.g. dynamic
positioning controller including thrust allocation), and the
low-level thruster control (Sørensen, 2005). In this paper
an overview of modelling and control of electrically driven
FPP on vessels at low advance speed is given. The paper
summarize some of the main results from Sørensen and
Smogeli (2009), Smogeli and Sørensen (2009), Smogeli
(2006) and Ruth (2008). Related research can be found in
the following references: Blanke and Busk Nielsen (1987),
Blanke and Busk Nielsen (1990), Blanke (1994), Sørensen
et al. (1997), Smogeli et al. (2003, 2004b,a, 2005, 2008),
Ruth et al. (2006), Pivano (2008), Bakkeheim et al. (2008),
and Blanke et al. (2007). Various governor control schemes
for diesel engines with direct mechanically driven pro-
pellers are presented in Blanke and Busk Nielsen (1990),
and are not further treated here. Unless otherwise stated, it
will in this paper be referred to tunnel thrusters, azimuthing
thrusters, pods, and main propellers as thrusters or pro-
pellers.
In the current work, two operational regimes are deﬁned:
normal and extreme conditions. In normal operating con-
ditions, i.e. calm to moderate seas, the dynamic loading
of the propeller due to thrust and torque losses is con-
sidered to be moderate. In extreme operating conditions,
i.e. high to extreme seas, the thrusters may be subject to
ventilation and in-and-out-of water effects. This leads to
large transients in propeller loading, and hence in thrust
and power, see e.g. Faltinsen et al. (1980), Minsaas et al.
(1987), Koushan (2004), Smogeli et al. (2004a), Ruth and
Smogeli (2006), and the references therein. For vessels
with diesel-electric propulsion systems, the thrusters are
normally the main power consumers. The thruster control
system performance is therefore critical for avoiding black-
outs and harmonic distortions in the power generation and
distribution system. In extreme conditions, the control sys-
tems designed for normal operating conditions may be in-
adequate, and lead to increased mechanical wear and tear
and unpredictable power consumption. Motivated by the
similar problem of a car wheel losing friction on a slip-
pery surface during braking or acceleration, the concept of
anti-spin thruster control was introduced in Smogeli et al.
(2003, 2004a), Smogeli (2006), and Smogeli et al. (2008).
In Ruth (2008) anti-spin thruster allocation is treated. Ruth
shows in his work how thrust may be re-allocated to non-
ventilating propellers, increasing overall efﬁciency and im-
proving thrust production. Thrust allocation will not be
considered in this paper.
2
PROPELLER MODELLING
This section treats modelling of propellers from a control
point of view. This means that the models are required to be
accurate enough to capture the main physical effects, and
such facilitate control system design and testing. The actual
propeller thrust Ta and torque Qa are inﬂuenced by many
parameters, the most important being propeller geometry,
submergence, and propeller loading – which depends on
the propeller pitch ratio and shaft speed. Ta and Qa can in

--- PAGE 1 ---
general be formulated as functions of ﬁxed thruster param-
eters θp (i.e. propeller diameter, geometry, position, etc.),
the shaft speed n, and variables xp (i.e. pitch ratio, advance
velocity, submergence, etc.):
Ta = fT (n, xp, θp),
(1a)
Qa = fQ(n, xp, θp).
(1b)
In the following, only speed controlled FPP will be consid-
ered. The pitch ratio will in this case be a ﬁxed parame-
ter. Further, only thrusters and propellers with low advance
number on dynamically positioned (DP) vessels are con-
sidered. DP includes station-keeping and low-speed track-
ing, and implies that the thrusters are subject to small water
inﬂow velocities. The models are, however, easily extend-
able to both controllable pitch propellers (CPP) and higher
inﬂow velocities, as experienced on vessels in transit, see
Smogeli (2006), Ruth et al. (2006) and Ruth (2008). The
functions fQ(·) and fT (·) may include loss effects due to
e.g. in-line and transverse velocity ﬂuctuations, ventila-
tion, in-and-out-of water effects, and thruster-thruster in-
teraction, as well as dynamic ﬂow effects.
2.1
Motor and Shaft Dynamics
The electric motor torque Qm is controlled by a high band-
width inner torque control loop. The resulting motor torque
dynamics is in this work considered to be negligible when
compared to the rotational dynamics of the propeller shaft.
Hence, the motor torque Qm may be replaced by the com-
manded torque Qc from the thruster controller. The rota-
tional dynamics of the propeller and shaft is then deﬁned
in terms of the moment of inertia for shafts, gears and pro-
peller Is, the angular velocity ω = 2πn, the commanded
torque Qc, the propeller load torque Qa, and the shaft fric-
tion Qf(ω) according to:
Is ˙ω = Qc −Qa −Qf(ω).
(2)
Qf(ω) may for most applications be viewed as a sum of a
static friction (or starting torque) Qs ≥0 and a linear com-
ponent Kωω, where Kω ≥0 is a linear friction coefﬁcient.
Consequently:
Qf(ω) = tanh(ω/ε)Qs + Kωω,
(3)
where ε > 0 is an appropriately chosen small constant.
More sophisticated models of the shaft dynamics, where
also ﬂow dynamics are included, have been developed and
analyzed by Yoerger et al. (1991), Healey et al. (1995),
Whitcomb and Yoerger (1999a), Bachmayer et al. (2000),
and Fossen and Blanke (2000). Such models have not been
considered for the current work, since they were developed
for deeply submerged propellers, and cannot account for
the large thrust losses that occur when the propeller is sub-
ject to ventilation and in-and-out-of water effects.
2.2
Propeller Characteristics
The relationships between the actual propeller thrust Ta,
torque Qa, shaft speed n, diameter D, and density of water
ρ are commonly given in the form of the thrust and torque
coefﬁcients KT(n, xp, θp) ≥0 and KQ(n, xp, θp) ≥0
according to:
Ta = fT (·) = sign(n)KT (n, xp, θp)ρD4n2,
(4)
Qa = fQ(·) = sign(n)KQ(n, xp, θp)ρD5n2.
(5)
The strictly positive propeller power consumption Pa may
be written as:
Pa = 2πnQa = sign(n)2πKQ(n, xp, θp)ρD5n3.
(6)
For a given propeller geometry, KT and KQ will for nota-
tional simplicity be written as functions of the angular ve-
locity ω and time t, with time representing the exogenous
thrust losses: KT (·) = KT (t, ω), and KQ(·) = KQ(t, ω).
The nominal thrust Tn, torque Qn, and power Pn for a
deeply submerged propeller with no thrust losses are given
by the constant nominal thrust and torque coefﬁcients for
zero advance number Va = 0, KT 0 > 0 and KQ0 > 0:
Tn = sign(n)KT 0ρD4n2,
(7a)
Qn = sign(n)KQ0ρD5n2,
(7b)
Pn = 2πnQn = sign(n)2πKQ0ρD5n3.
(7c)
When a propeller is subject to waves, current, and ves-
sel motion, it will experience a time-varying water inﬂow
(advance velocity). This leads to oscillations in the shaft
speed, thrust, torque, and power about their nominal val-
ues given by (7a)-(7c), depending on the thruster control
scheme.
2.3
Thrust Loss Effects
Modelling of thrust losses is most commonly solved by em-
pirical methods in conjunction with analytical models. The
following loss effects may be considered:
• Fluctuations in the in-line water inﬂow to the propeller
will cause ﬂuctuations in thrust and torque.
• Water inﬂow perpendicular to the propeller axis will
introduce a force in the direction of the inﬂow due
to deﬂection of the propeller race, termed transverse
losses.
This is often referred to as cross-coupling
drag for open and ducted propellers (Lehn, 1992), and
speed or suction loss for tunnel thrusters, see Chislett
and Bj¨orheden (1966) or Brix (1978).
• For heavily loaded propellers ventilation (air suction)
caused by decreasing pressure on the propeller blades
may occur, especially when the effective submergence
of the propeller becomes small due to waves and
wave-frequency motions of the ship, see e.g. Shiba

--- PAGE 2 ---
(1953). If the relative propeller motion results in wa-
ter exits, additional losses due to in-and-out-of-water
effects following a hysteresis pattern similar to the
Wagner effect will occur, see e.g.
Faltinsen et al.
(1980) or Smogeli (2006) and the references therein.
These losses mostly affect tunnel thrusters and main
propellers.
• For azimuthing thrusters, both thrust reduction and
change of thrust direction may occur due to thruster-
hull interaction caused by frictional losses and pres-
sure effects when the thruster race sweeps along the
hull (Lehn, 1992). The last is referred to as the Coanda
effect.
• Thruster-thruster interaction caused by inﬂuence from
the propeller race from one thruster on neighboring
thrusters may lead to signiﬁcant thrust reduction, if
not appropriate precautions are taken in the thrust al-
location algorithm, see e.g. Lehn (1992) or Koushan
(2004).
The sensitivity to the different types of losses depends on
the type of propeller and thruster used, application of skegs
and ﬁns, hull design and operational philosophy. The ef-
fect of the above mentioned thrust losses may be expressed
by the thrust and torque reduction coefﬁcients βT and βQ,
which express the ratio of the actual to the nominal thrust
and torque (Minsaas et al., 1987):
βT (t, ω) = Ta/Tn = KT (t, ω)/KT 0,
(8)
βQ(t, ω) = Qa/Qn = KQ(t, ω)/KQ0.
(9)
In order to improve the understanding of thrust losses due
to ventilation and in-and-out-of-water effects, systematic
experiments in the cavitation tunnel at NTNU have recently
been performed. As an example, Figure 1 shows the rela-
tive thrust T/Tmax as a function of the relative submer-
gence h/R and the shaft speed n for a ducted propeller.
h is the propeller shaft submergence, R is the propeller
radius, T is the measured thrust, and Tmax is the maxi-
mum thrust observed in the experiments. For large h/R,
the thruster performs as expected, with thrust proportional
to n2. For low shaft speeds, and hence low propeller load-
ing, the thrust is constant for h/R = 1.5 to h/R = 1, and
then decays almost linearly from h/R = 1 to h/R = 0.
This corresponds to lost thrust due to loss of effective disc
area (Minsaas et al., 1987). If the propeller loading is sufﬁ-
ciently high, the low pressure on the propeller blades may
create a funnel through which air is drawn from the free
surface, thus ventilating the propeller (Shiba, 1953). For a
heavily loaded propeller, ventilation may lead to an abrupt
loss of thrust and torque as high as 70-80%. Figure 1 indi-
cates that a reduction of shaft speed in such a case may in-
crease the thrust, and that an increase in shaft speed will not
increase the thrust. In the following, “ventilation losses”
and “ventilation incidents” will be used as common terms
for the above mentioned loss effects. A simpliﬁed simula-
tion model based on the experimental results is presented
in Smogeli et al. (2008) and Smogeli (2006).
5
10
15
20
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
n
h/R
T/Tmax
Figure 1: Relative thrust T/Tmax as a function of relative
submergence h/R and propeller shaft speed n, from exper-
iments.
The mechanical effects of the dynamic loading of the pro-
peller during ventilation, typically at shaft frequency, blade
frequency, and above, is also an important topic. There are
few available references considering such dynamic loads,
but a summary of previous ﬁndings and a thorough inves-
tigation of dynamic load effects can be found in Olofsson
(1996). Although not well documented in literature, indus-
trial experience shows that the high thrust losses combined
with wave-frequency cyclic variations in propeller loading
may lead to severe mechanical wear and tear of the propul-
sion unit (Koushan, 2004). According to Olofsson (1996),
the dynamic loads during ventilation increase with the pro-
peller shaft speed. It is, therefore, considered beneﬁcial to
avoid high shaft speeds during ventilation.
3
LOW-LEVEL THRUSTER CONTROLLERS
The purpose of the low-level thruster controller is to relate
the desired thrust Td, given by the thrust allocation rou-
tine, to the commanded motor torque Qc. The thruster con-
trollers may be divided in two control regimes, depending
on the operational conditions:
(a) Thruster control in normal conditions, when experienc-
ing low to moderate thrust losses.
(b) Thruster control in extreme conditions, when experi-
encing large and abrupt thrust losses due to ventilation
and in-and-out-of-water effects.
For surface vessels with FPP, shaft speed control is the
industry standard, whereas torque and power control was
introduced by Sørensen et al. (1997), and a combined
torque and power controller was presented in Smogeli et al.
(2004b). For underwater vehicles, both torque and vari-
ous shaft speed control schemes have been proposed, see

--- PAGE 3 ---
Yoerger et al. (1991), Whitcomb and Yoerger (1999b), Fos-
sen and Blanke (2000), and the references therein. For
control of diesel engines, shaft speed control is the most
commonly used solution. However, both torque and power
control have been proposed and implemented, see Blanke
and Busk Nielsen (1987, 1990).
3.1
Control Objectives
Shaft speed feedback control is the conventional way to
control a FPP. However, as will be shown later, this may
not be the best design choice. The ultimate goal of any
thruster controller is to make the actual thrust track the de-
sired thrust. Since no feedback from the actual thrust is
available, different ways of trying to achieve this for a FPP
are:
• Shaft speed feedback control.
• Torque feedforward control.
• Power feedback control.
• Combinations of the above.
In dynamic operating conditions, other goals may be more
important than tracking the desired thrust, e.g. reducing
mechanical wear and tear, and limiting power oscillations
and peak values. Predictable power consumption is of ma-
jor concern to the power management system in order to
avoid blackouts and improving the performance and the
stability of the electrical power plant network. Other per-
formance criteria than thrust production should therefore
also be taken into account. In this work, the following per-
formance criteria are considered:
1. Thrust production in presence of disturbances, i.e.
ability to locally counteract thrust losses.
2. Mechanical wear and tear caused by transients and os-
cillations in motor and propeller torque.
3. Predictable power consumption.
4
THRUSTER CONTROL IN NORMAL CONDITIONS
4.1
Controller Structure
The low-level thruster controller is proposed to be com-
posed of ﬁve main building blocks: reference generator,
core controller, inertia compensation, friction compensa-
tion, and torque limiting. This is shown in Figure 2, where
a block diagram of a thruster with low-level thruster con-
troller is presented. The commanded torque from the core
controller is termed Qci, where i = n for shaft speed con-
trol, i = q for torque control, i = p for power control, and
i = c for combined torque/power control. The commanded
torque from the friction and inertia compensation schemes
are termed Qff and Qif, respectively, and the total com-
manded torque before torque and power limiting Qc0 is
given by:
Qc0 = Qci + Qff + Qif.
(10)
Qc0 is then limited by a torque and power limiting function
to yield the commanded torque to the motor Qc.
4.2
Control Plant Model Parameters
Since the propeller diameter D and density of water ρ are
known and constant, the only remaining parameters are the
thrust and torque coefﬁcients KT and KQ. The thrust and
torque coefﬁcients used in the controllers are termed KT C
and KQC, and denoted control coefﬁcients.
4.2.1
Choosing KT C and KQC
In thruster control for station-keeping operations, estimates
of the nominal thrust and torque coefﬁcients KT 0 and KQ0
are usually chosen as control coefﬁcients, because the ac-
tual advance velocity is unknown to the controller. Doppler
logs, GPS, or similar may be used to give estimates of the
advance velocity, but these measurements are usually not
of sufﬁcient accuracy for inclusion in the low-level thruster
controllers.
For thruster control in transit, only the main propellers
of the vessel are used. If the propeller characteristics are
known, improved controller performance may be achieved
by estimating the propeller advance velocity Va using the
known vessel surge speed U and an estimated hull wake
factor, or a low-pass ﬁltered measurement from a Doppler
log or GPS. KT C and KQC could then be estimated from
the propeller characteristics. Similar reasoning may be ap-
plied to an underwater vehicle, where the propeller nor-
mally is deeply submerged and not subject to wave ef-
fects, ventilation and water exits. Such an output feedback
shaft speed controller with advance speed compensation
for AUVs can be found in Fossen and Blanke (2000). In
the following, station-keeping and low-speed manoeuvring
operations of surface vessels are of main concern, such that
the control coefﬁcients are taken as KT 0 and KQ0.
4.2.2
Reverse Thrust
With the exception of tunnel thrusters, most propellers are
asymmetric. To achieve good performance for both posi-
tive and negative thrust references, it may therefore be nec-
essary to use two sets of control parameters. For low-speed
operations, this means that KT 0 and KQ0 should be used
for positive Tr, and the reverse thrust coefﬁcients KT 0r and
KQ0r for negative Tr. The following control coefﬁcients
are therefore proposed:
KT C = KT 0λc + (1 −λc)KT 0r,
(11a)
KQC = KQ0λc + (1 −λc)KQ0r,
(11b)
where λc is a smooth switching function given by:
λc = λc(nr) = 1
2 + 1
2 tanh(εc
nr
nc
),
(12)
where εc > 0 is a constant. The shaft speed reference nr is
given from Tr by:
nr = gn(Tr) = sign(Tr)
s
|Tr|
ρD4KT C
,
(13)

--- PAGE 4 ---
n
Q
Q
Ta
a
m
Motor
dynamics
Qc
Torque
limit
Shaft
dynamics
Pmax
Qmax
Propulsion unit
n
Core
controller
Control scheme
Qci
Tr
Friction
comp.
Qff
Td
Reference
generator
Inertia
comp.
Qif
nr
nr.
Qm
Propeller
hydro-
dynamics
Qc0
Figure 2: Block diagram of a thruster with reference generator, core controller, inertia and friction compensation, and
torque limiting.
which is the inverse function of the nominal shaft speed-
to-force characteristics given in (7a) with KT 0 replaced by
KT C. The switch between the coefﬁcients occurs smoothly
in the interval nr ∈[−nc, nc], such that λc ≈0 for
nr < −nc and λc ≈1 for nr > nc. The switch “width”
nc may be chosen freely.
(11) does not affect the sta-
bility properties of the controllers when compared to us-
ing constant control coefﬁcients, since KT 0, KQ0, KT 0r,
and KQ0r are strictly positive, and the values of KT C and
KQC only affect the mappings from thrust reference to
shaft speed, torque, and power reference. Using nr as the
switching variable instead of e.g. the measured shaft speed
n means that no measurement noise is entered into the con-
trol law through (11).
4.3
Reference Generator
An appropriate reference generator for this system is a
second-order ﬁlter with rate limiting. The reference gen-
erator is imposed on the desired shaft speed nd, where nd
is given from Td by gn in (13), and Td is given from nd by
the inverse g−1
n (nd), which is equal to (7a) with KT 0 re-
placed by KT C. The second-order ﬁlter has damping ratio
ζr and natural frequency ωr0, and the shaft speed rate limit
is set to ˙nslew , such that the reference generator is given
by:
nd = gn(Td),
˙nd2 = min(max( ˙nd, −˙nslew), ˙nslew),
nr(s) = nd2(s)
ω2
r0
s2 + 2ζrωr0s + ω2
r0
,
Tr = g−1
n (nr).
(14)
Notice that the reference generator gives a continuous ac-
celeration reference ˙nr, which is available directly from the
implementation of the second-order ﬁlter.
4.4
Inertia Compensation
For a large thruster, the rotational inertia may be a dominat-
ing dynamic term. In order to achieve the desired closed
loop properties with respect to response and tracking, it
may therefore be beneﬁcial to include an inertia compensa-
tion term. The inertial term in the rotational dynamics (2)
is Is ˙ω. Since differentiation of the measured shaft speed
is undesirable, and the inertia compensation is wanted only
when the thrust reference is changed, the following feed-
forward compensation is proposed:
Qif(nr) = Ic2π ˙nr,
(15)
where Ic is an estimate of the rotational inertia Is, and ˙nr
is given by the reference generator in (14).
4.5
Friction Compensation
In the torque and power controllers, the friction term
Qf(ω) will be compensated by a feedforward controller. If
this is not the case, and the friction is signiﬁcant, the con-
trollers will be inaccurate, since at steady state Qm ≈Qa
no longer holds, see (2). If the shaft friction becomes sig-
niﬁcant, a feedforward friction term Qff should therefore
be included in the control law. Note that the inclusion of
Qff in the shaft speed controller is unnecessary, since this
controller automatically compensates for the friction.
Qff should be designed to compensate for the friction term
Qf(ω), i.e. Qff ≈Qf(ω), without destabilizing the sys-
tem. Therefore a feedforward compensation based on the
reference shaft speed nr from (13) is chosen instead of a
destabilizing feedback compensation based on n. Moti-
vated by (3) the friction is assumed to consist of a static
and a linear term, and the friction compensation scheme is
proposed as:
Qff(nr) = Qff0(nr) + Qff1(nr).
(16)
Qff0(nr) is proposed as:
Qff0(nr) = Qf0 tanh(εf
nr
ns
),
(17)
where Qf0, εs > 0, and ns are constants. The switch
between −Qf0 and Qf0 occurs smoothly in the interval
nr ∈[−ns, ns] such that |nr| > ns ⇒Qff0(nr) =
sign(nr)Qf0, and nr = 0 ⇒Qff0(nr) = 0. Note that
the switching function is of similar form as the one used in
(12). Qff1 is proposed as:
Qff1(nr) = 2πQf1nr,
(18)

--- PAGE 5 ---
where the linear friction coefﬁcient Qf1 should be cho-
sen such that Qf1 ≈Kω. In nominal conditions, n =
nr ⇒Qff1(nr) ≈Kωω. For n ̸= nr, Qff1(nr) ̸= Kωω,
but this only affects the performance about the equilibrium
point.
4.6
Torque and Power Limiting
The rated (nominal) torque and power for continuous oper-
ation of the motor are denoted QN and PN. The maximum
torque and power for the motor are usually set to
Qmax = kQN,
Pmax = kPN,
(19)
where k typically is in the range of 1.1 −1.2. The input to
the motor should be limited by a torque limiting function
given by:
|Qc| = min{|Qc0|, Qmax, Pmax/|2πn|},
where Qc0 is the commanded torque from the controller
(10). The maximum power limit yields hyperbolic limit
curves for the torque as a function of speed. Since the
maximum power is not limited by the converter and motor
ratings only, but also by the available power in the genera-
tors, this limit should vary accordingly. By this method the
power limitation will become fast and accurate, allowing
to utilize the power system power capability with a built-in
blackout prevention.
4.7
Shaft Speed Feedback Control
For conventional FPP a speed controller is used to achieve
the commanded propeller force. Given a speciﬁed force
command Tr the corresponding reference (commanded)
speed of the propeller nr is found by the shaft speed map-
ping in (13). The shaft speed PI controller utilizes shaft
speed feedback from the thruster, and sets the commanded
motor torque Qcn according to
Qcn = Kpe + Ki
Z t
0
e(τ)dτ,
(20)
where the shaft speed error is e = nr −n, and Kp and
Ki are the nonnegative PI gains. The motor torque is con-
trolled by the inner torque control loop, see e.g. Leonhard
(1996). Ki is often given as Ki = Kp/Ti, where Ti is
the integral time constant. The integral term in the PI con-
troller should be limited according to Qmax to avoid inte-
gral windup.
4.8
Torque Feedforward Control
In the torque control strategy the outer speed control loop is
removed, and the thruster is controlled by its inner torque
control loop with a commanded torque Qcq as set-point.
A mapping from the reference thrust Tr to the reference
torque Qr can be found from (7a) and (7b) with KT 0 and
KQ0 replaced by KT C and KQC. The commanded motor
torque Qcq is set equal to the reference torque:
Qcq = Qr = KQC
KT C
DTr.
(21)
If the response of the thruster is slow, e.g. due to high rota-
tional inertia, the inertia compensation scheme in (15) may
be needed to speed up the response. This replaces the “in-
ner torque algorithm” proposed in Sørensen et al. (1997).
4.9
Power Feedback Control
Power control is based on controlling the power consump-
tion of the thruster motor. The inner torque control loop is
maintained, and the reference power Pr is found by insert-
ing Qr from (21) and nr from (13) in (7c) such that
Pr = Qr2πnr = |Tr|3/2 2πKQC
√ρDK3/2
T C
.
(22)
To determine the torque direction, the signed reference
power Prs is deﬁned as
Prs = sign(Tr)Pr = sign(Tr)|Tr|3/2 2πKQC
√ρDK3/2
T C
.
(23)
The commanded motor torque Qcp is calculated from Prs
using feedback from the measured shaft speed n ̸= 0 ac-
cording to
Qcp = Prs
2π|n| =
KQC
√ρDK3/2
T C
sign(Tr)|Tr|3/2
|n|
.
(24)
Note that the power controller is singular for zero shaft
speed.
As in torque control the inertia compensation
scheme in (15) may be added if the response of the thruster
is slow, replacing the “inner power algorithm” in Sørensen
et al. (1997).
4.10
Combined Torque and Power Control
A signiﬁcant shortcoming of the power control scheme in
(24) is the fact that it is singular for zero shaft speed. This
means that power control should not be used close to the
singular point, for example when commanding low thrust
or changing the thrust direction. For low thrust commands,
torque control shows better performance in terms of con-
stant thrust production, since the mapping from thrust to
torque is more directly related to the propeller loading than
the mapping from thrust to power. For high thrust com-
mands, it is essential to avoid power transients, as these
lead to higher fuel consumption and possible danger of
power blackout and harmonic distortion of the power plant
network. Power control is hence a natural choice for high
thrust commands.
This motivates the construction of a
combined torque/power control scheme, utilizing the best
properties of both controllers (Smogeli et al., 2004b).
Combining the reference torque from the torque controller
Qcq given by (21) and the reference torque from the power
controller Qcp given by (24), the commanded motor torque
Qcc from the combined torque/power controller is deﬁned
as:
Qcc = αc(n)Qcq + (1 −αc(n))Qcp.
(25)
αc(n) is a weighting function:
αc(n) = e−k|pn|r, for n ∈Z,
(26)

--- PAGE 6 ---
where k, p and r are positive constants. It satisﬁes:
lim
n→0 αc(n) = 1,
lim
n→∞αc(n) = 0,
and shows smooth behavior for all n.
Particularly,
dαc/dn = 0 for n = 0 and n →±∞. The shape of αc(n)
deﬁnes the dominant regimes of the two control schemes,
and can be used to tune the controller according to user
speciﬁcations. The parameter p will act as a scaling factor
for n. A small p will widen the weighting function, giving
a wider transition between 0 and 1. Increasing the param-
eter k sharpens the peak about n = 0, whereas r widens it
and makes the transition from 0 to 1 more steep. The shaft
speed is physically limited to some max value nmax, such
that αc(nmax) should be close to zero. It is easily shown
that Qcc is non-singular if r > 1. Hence, the power control
singularity for n = 0 is removed.
The torque and power controllers aim at controlling the mo-
tor torque or power, respectively. There is no need for in-
tegral action in these controllers, since the motor torque is
controlled by its inner torque control loop. Consequently,
the torque and power controllers allow the shaft speed of
the propeller to vary with the propeller loading, in order to
keep the torque or power constant.
5
THRUSTER CONTROL IN EXTREME CONDITIONS
5.1
Loss Estimation and Ventilation Detection
In the development of the anti-spin thruster controller, a
scheme for thruster performance monitoring and ventila-
tion detection will be essential.
This section presents a
load torque observer based on the thruster rotational dy-
namics in (2), as ﬁrst presented in Smogeli et al. (2004a)
and Smogeli (2006). The load torque estimate can be used
to calculate the estimated torque loss factor ˆβQ. Finally,
a ventilation detection scheme based on ˆβQ and the mea-
sured motor torque Qm will be developed.
5.1.1
Load Torque Observer
From (2), the following control plant model of the thruster
dynamics is proposed:
Is ˙ω = Qm −Qa −Qff0(nr) −Qf1ω + δf,
˙Qa = wq,
(27)
where the measured Qm has been used instead of Qc. Since
KQ(n, xp, θp) in (5) is unknown and may exhibit highly
nonlinear behavior, Qa is here assumed to be a bias term
driven by an exogenous bounded disturbance wq. This is
necessary in order to capture the fast transients during ven-
tilation. The static friction compensation term Qff0(nr)
from (16) is used instead of a static friction model based on
ω in order to avoid oscillations in this term about ω ≈0.
Errors in the friction model are accounted for by δf. With
the measurement y = ω + v contaminated with a bounded
disturbance v, and ˆy = ˆω, a propeller load torque observer
copying the control plant model (27) is:
˙ˆω = 1/Is[Qm −ˆQa −Qff0(nr) −Qf1ˆω] + ka(y −ˆy),
˙ˆQa = kb(y −ˆy),
(28)
where ka and kb are the observer gains. In Smogeli and
Sørensen (2009) it is shown that with a constant load torque
Qa implied by wq = 0, zero measurement disturbance
v = 0, and perfect friction knowledge such that δf = 0,
the equilibrium point of the observer estimation error is
globally exponentially stable (GES) if the observer gains
are chosen as ka > −Qf1/Is and kb < 0.
5.1.2
Torque Loss Estimation
For DP operation the expected nominal propeller load
torque ˆQn may be calculated from (7b) by feedback from
the propeller shaft speed n. Based on (9), the estimated
torque loss factor ˆβQ is calculated from ˆQa in (28) and ˆQn
as:
ˆβQ =
ˆQa
ˆQn
=
ˆQa
KQCρD5n |n|, n ̸= 0,
(29)
where the control coefﬁcient KQC (usually equal to KQ0)
is used to calculate ˆQn.
Remark 1 There are no thrust losses for n = 0. Hence,
the singularity for n = 0 is easily avoided by redeﬁning
(29) as ˆβQ = αb(n) + (1 −αb(n)) ˆQa/ ˆQn, where αb(n) is
a function of the type (26).
5.1.3
Ventilation Detection
In this work, the ventilation detection algorithm is imple-
mented by deﬁning limits for the onset and termination of
ventilation, βv,on and βv,off, and generating a detection
signal by monitoring the thrust loss factor ˆβQ. An addi-
tional criterion for detection is that the magnitude of the
motor torque Qm is non-increasing. A ventilation incident
will then give the following evolution of the detection sig-
nal ζ, with time instants t1 < t2 < t3:
t1 :
ˆβQ > βv,on
⇒ζ = 0,
t2 :
ˆβQ ≤βv,on ∩sign(Qm) ˙Qm ≤0
⇒ζ = 1,
t3 :
ˆβQ ≥βv,off
⇒ζ = 0.
(30)
To avoid switching and chattering of the detection signal
due to measurement noise and transients, an algorithm im-
plementing a detection delay is added, such that once ven-
tilation has been detected, it cannot be reset until after a
given time interval Tvent. The detection delay can be seen
as an implementation of the switching dwell-time proposed
in Hespanha and Morse (2002). This ventilation detection
scheme has shown good performance in both simulations
and experiments. Note that βv,on should be chosen signiﬁ-
cantly lower than 1 in order to allow for natural oscillations
about the nominal propeller loading due to time-varying in-
ﬂow to the propeller.

--- PAGE 7 ---
5.2
Anti-spin Thruster Control
The torque and power controllers, although advantageous
for normal operating conditions, will show unacceptable
behavior when subject to large thrust losses. The nature
of this problem is in many ways similar to that of a car
wheel losing traction on a slippery surface during accel-
eration or braking (Smogeli et al., 2008). The work on
anti-spin thruster control has therefore been motivated by
similar control strategies in car anti-spin and ABS braking
systems, see for example Haskara et al. (2000). With any
of the core controllers from Section 4 in use for normal op-
erating conditions, the proposed anti-spin control scheme
is divided in two:
1. Primary anti-spin action: override the core controller
and take control of the shaft speed.
2. Secondary anti-spin action: lower the setpoint of the
controller to reduce the shaft speed.
5.2.1
Primary Anti-spin Action
If a ventilation incident is detected by the detection algo-
rithm in (30), the desired primary anti-spin control action
is to take control of the shaft speed until the ventilation has
terminated. This is done by modifying the core controller
output Qci in (10) with a torque scaling factor γ:
Qcas = γQci,
(31)
where Qcas is the anti-spin commanded torque, and γ is
proposed as:
γ =
(
1
for
ζ = 0
(not ventilated),
ˆβQ
for
ζ = 1
(ventilated).
(32)
In Smogeli and Sørensen (2009) it is shown that the anti-
spin control law will give a bounded shaft speed during
ventilation.
5.2.2
Secondary Anti-spin Action: Setpoint Mapping
For optimization of thrust production and reduction of wear
and tear due to dynamic propeller loading during ventila-
tion, it may desirable to reduce the propeller shaft speed.
This can be done by modifying the thrust reference dur-
ing ventilation, since the primary anti-spin control action
assures that the shaft speed is kept close to its reference.
The desired shaft speed during ventilation, nas, will be a
thruster speciﬁc parameter, and must be chosen as a trade-
off between thrust production, wear and tear, and response
time.
The nominal shaft speed reference nr from (13)
should not be changed to nas instantaneously, as this will
lead to undesired transients. It is therefore proposed to add
a low-pass ﬁlter with time constant τn and a rate limiting
algorithm to the change from nr to nas at ventilation detec-
tion, and from nas to nr at ventilation termination. The ﬁl-
tered and rate limited shaft speed reference is termed nras,
i.e. ˙nfall < ˙nras < ˙nrise, where ˙nfall and ˙nrise are the
rate limits. The thrust reference corresponding to nras is
termed Tras, and is given by (7a) with KT 0 replaced by
KT C:
Tras = sign(nras)KT CρD4n2
ras.
(33)
Since (33) is the inverse of (13), Tras ≡Tr when ventila-
tion is not detected.
5.2.3
Implementation Aspects
Perfect shaft speed control during ventilation would be
possible if the ventilation incident could be foreseen, and
βQ(t, ω) was known. However, since the propeller torque
is not available as a measurement, and the ventilation inci-
dents are random processes caused by wave elevation and
vessel motion, this is not possible. An implementable so-
lution is to use the torque loss estimation and ventilation
detection schemes. The deviation of the shaft speed from
the steady-state solution will then depend on the deviation
of the torque modiﬁcation factor γ from the actual torque
loss factor βQ(t, ω) during ventilation.
To achieve the best possible control over the shaft speed
during ventilation, γ should be switched from 1 to ˆβQ im-
mediately when ventilation is detected. However, in or-
der to avoid transients in the control input, the transition
of γ from 1 to ˆβQ at ventilation detection, and from ˆβQ
to 1 at ventilation termination, should be rate limited, i.e.
˙γfall < ˙γ < ˙γrise. The rate limits ˙γrise and ˙γfall would
typically be of magnitude 1. Furthermore, to avoid using
the potentially noisy estimate ˆβQ directly in the control
law, it may be beneﬁcial to ﬁlter γ by a properly chosen
low-pass ﬁlter with time constant τγ.
A block diagram of the resulting thruster controller with
anti-spin is shown in Figure 3. Note that the proposed anti-
spin controller may be used with all the core controllers
from Section 4.
Remark 2 A well-tuned shaft speed controller will pro-
duce a controller output similar to the proposed anti-spin
controller in (31) during ventilation, since the objective of
the shaft speed controller is to keep the shaft speed con-
stant, regardless of the load disturbance. However, since it
is desired to use torque and power control in normal con-
ditions, using a shaft speed controller during ventilation
would require switching between the two controllers. This
approach is further discussed in Smogeli (2006). If shaft
speed control is chosen for normal conditions, anti-spin
control may not be necessary.
6
SENSITIVITY TO THRUST LOSSES
The steady-state performance of the controllers presented
above can be theoretically analyzed by establishing the sen-
sitivity to various thrust loss effects. Depending on the
controller, a loss of propeller loading may, in addition to
changes in propeller thrust and torque, lead to changes in
shaft speed and power. As proposed by Sørensen et al.
(1997) the relationship between the actual and reference

--- PAGE 8 ---
n
f
Q
Q
Ta
a
T
m
( )
f Q ( ).
.
Motor
dynamics
Qc
Friction
compensation
.
Tr
X
Qci
g
Core
thruster
controller
Shaft
dynamics
Loss
calculation
Torque
observer
Ventilation
detection
bQ
Anti-spin
control
Qa
Tras
Qcas
z
T
Propulsion
unit
as
Tr
n
z
LP filter +
rate limit
nrise nfall tn
nras
1
bQ
LP filter +
rate limit
g
Tras
rise
fall t
g
g
g
nr
1
0
1
0
{0,1}
+
+
.
.
.
.
Qff
n
Torque
limit
P
Qmax
max
gn( ).
gn ( ).
-1
Qc0
Qif
Inertia
compensation
+
+
Anti-spin
control
scheme
Reference
generator
Td
Figure 3: The anti-spin control scheme, including core con-
troller, torque observer, loss calculation, ventilation detec-
tion, and anti-spin control actions.
thrust, torque, shaft speed, and power are termed sensitivity
functions.
When developing the steady-state sensitivity functions
(Smogeli, 2006) it is assumed that all controllers obtain
their objectives perfectly, i.e. n = nr for shaft speed con-
trol, Qa = Qr for torque control, and Pa = Pr for power
control. It has hence been assumed that the friction is per-
fectly compensated for in torque and power control, i.e.
Qff = Qf.
Assuming that all controllers perform ideally, the steady-
state sensitivity functions for speed control, torque control
and power control are shown in Table 1. For details in the
derivation of the sensitivity functions, see Sørensen et al.
(1997) and Smogeli (2006).
Remark 3 It is interesting to note that if the controllers
have knowledge of the instantaneous values of KT and
KQ, such that KT C = KT and KQC = KQ at all times,
all sensitivity functions reduce to unity, since nr from (13),
Qr from (21), and Pr from (23) will be equal to the true
values n, Qa, and Pa. This means that all controllers per-
form identically. Also notice that sni(·)sqi(·) ≡spi(·) for
all controllers, as should be expected.
7
EXPERIMENTS
This section presents experimental results with the con-
trollers designed above.
The importance of the friction
compensation scheme is investigated, and the dynamic per-
formance of the controllers in various operating conditions
tested.
Motor
Waves
Strut
Underwater
housing
Shaft
Qa
Ta
Qm
Control CPU
Source CPU
Simulink
Matlab
Opal RT-Lab
QNX
Executable
Qc
Qm,n
h
R
Control
code
Log
Measurements
Vertical
motion
Figure 4: Sketch of the experimental setup.
D [m]
KT 0
KQ0
Is [kgm2]
Qs[Nm]
Kω[Nms]
0.25
0.513
0.0444
0.05
1.0
0.01
Table 2: Main propeller data.
The majority of the experiments were conducted for shaft
speed control, torque control, and power control, since
the main purpose of this work was to test the proper-
ties of the basic thruster control methods. The combined
torque/power controller was also tested, and behaved ex-
actly as expected. Its performance can be inferred from the
performance of the torque and power controllers.
7.1
Experimental Setup
The experiments were conducted in the Marine Cybernet-
ics Laboratory (MCLab) at NTNU. The MCLab basin is
40m long, 6.45m wide, and 1.5m deep, and is equipped
with a towing carriage and a wave-maker system. Two
types of setups were used during the various tests. The
tested propeller was of conventional design with 4 blades,
pitch ratio at 70% of the propeller radius P/D = 1.0, and
expanded blade area ratio EAR = 0.55. The propeller
was tested both with and without duct. For the results pre-
sented here a duct was used for the anti-spin tests only. The
propeller was attached to a shaft equipped with thrust and
torque sensors inside an underwater housing, and driven
by an electric motor via shafts and gears with gear ratio
1:1. The rig with motor, gears, underwater housing, shaft
and propeller was ﬁxed to the towing carriage on a verti-
cal slide, which was used to control the submergence of
the propeller relative to the free surface. Ventilation inci-
dents could hence be generated by moving the propeller
vertically with a calm free surface. The motor torque was
controlled from a PC onboard the carriage, using feed-
back from the propeller shaft speed and the motor torque.
The control code was generated by rapid prototyping us-
ing Opal RT-Lab and source code in Matlab/Simulink. A
sketch of the experimental setup is given in Fig. 4.
The main characteristics of the ducted propeller and drive
system are summarized in Table 2.
The nominal thrust

--- PAGE 9 ---
Sensitivity
Speed control
Torque control
Power control
Thrust: sti(·) ≜Ta
Tr
stn(·) =
KT
KT C
stq(·) =
KT
KT C
KQC
KQ
stp(·) =
KT
KT C ( KQC
KQ )2/3
Speed: sni(·) ≜
n
nr
snn(·) = 1
snq(·) =
q
KQC
KQ
snp(·) =
K1/3
QC
K1/3
Q
Torque: sqi(·) ≜Qa
Qr
sqn(·) =
KQ
KQC
sqq(·) = 1
sqp(·) =
K1/3
Q
K1/3
QC
Power: spi(·) ≜Pa
Pr
spn(·) =
KQ
KQC
spq(·) =
K1/2
QC
K1/2
Q
spp(·) = 1
Table 1: Sensitivity functions, where i=n for shaft speed control, i=q for torque control, i=p for power control, and i=c for
combined torque/power control
and torque coefﬁcients for the propeller without duct were
found to be KT 0 = 0.570 and KQ0 = 0.0750. The nom-
inal thrust and torque coefﬁcients for reversed thrust were
found to be KT 0r = 0.393 and KQ0r = 0.0655.
7.1.1
Friction
In the experiments presented here, the shaft friction turned
out to affect the performance of the torque and power con-
trollers. A feedforward friction compensation scheme as
proposed in Section 4.5 was therefore implemented. Over
the course of the experiments, the friction compensation
coefﬁcients were found to be in the range Qf0 ∈[0.8, 1.0]
and Qf1 ∈[0.009, 0.011].
7.1.2
Control Parameters
The control coefﬁcients KT C and KQC used in the ex-
periments were as given by (11), with the half “width” of
the transition region nc = 3. The rotational inertia of the
model-scale propeller was not found to be a dominating
term. Hence, the inertia compensation scheme in (15) was
not needed. Therefore, and since only feasible thrust ref-
erence trajectories were used, no reference generator as in
(14) was used. The constant plus linear friction compen-
sation scheme (16) was used, with Qf0 and Qf1 appropri-
ately chosen in the range speciﬁed above. The switching
“width” of the smooth switching function in (17) was cho-
sen as ns = 0.5. The shaft speed PI controller parameters
(20) were chosen as Kp = 0.2 and Ti = 0.05 s, which gave
adequate tracking properties. For the combined controller
(25), the weighting function parameters (26) were chosen
as [r, p, k] = [4, 0.5, 1]. This gave a pure torque controller
for n < 0.5 and a pure power controller for n > 3.
The friction compensation was chosen with Qf0s
=
1.0Nm and Qf1 = 0.01Nms. The inertia compensation
was not needed for the small model-scale propeller. The
control coefﬁcients were chosen as KT C = KT 0 = 0.513
and KQC = KQ0 = 0.0444. For the combined controller
(25), the weighting function parameters (26) were chosen
as [r, p, k] = [4, 0.5, 1]. This gave a pure torque controller
for n < 0.5rps and a pure power controller for n > 3rps.
The shaft speed PI controller parameters (20) were chosen
as Kp = 0.2 and Ti = 0.05s.
In the load torque observer, the gains were chosen as ka =
15 and kb = −25. In the ventilation detection scheme, the
parameters were chosen as βv,on = 0.6 and βv,off = 0.9,
and the detection delay was set to Tvent = 1s. For the
proposed anti-spin controller, the settings for the primary
anti-spin action were ˙γrise = 1s−1, ˙γfall = −1s−1, and
unless otherwise stated τγ = 0.3s. For the secondary anti-
spin action, the ﬁlter time constant was chosen as τn =
0.05s, and the rate limits were chosen as ˙nrise = 3s−2 and
˙nfall = −3s−2. The desired shaft speed during ventilation
was set to nas = 9rps. The latter choice was motivated
from observations during the tests, where it seemed that the
most violent dynamic loading disappeared below 10rps. A
maximum shaft speed of nmax = 25rps was enforced.
The anti-spin control scheme appears to be robust to param-
eter tuning. In order to avoid detection chattering, however,
it is important not to choose βv,on too large. In addition, if
the rate limits are chosen too low or the ﬁlter time con-
stants too large, the anti-spin controller response will be-
come slow, and the shaft speed will be allowed to increase
more during ventilation. A further discussion and guide-
lines on tuning are given in Smogeli (2006).
7.2
Quasi-static Tests
In these tests the thrust reference was kept constant
at Tr
=
100N, the advance velocities were Va
=
{−1, −0.5, 0, 0.5, 1, 1.5} m/s, and the speed, torque, and
power controllers were used. Each combination was run 3
times, giving a total of 54 runs. The tests showed excellent
repeatability. The length of the test series were limited by
the length of the basin, but gave adequate statistical values.
The performance of the three controllers are summed up
in Figure 5, where the propeller thrust Ta, propeller torque
Qa, shaft speed n, motor torque Qm, and motor power Pm
are shown for varying advance speeds. The friction com-
pensation is not included in the plots of motor torque and
power. It is clear that the three controllers obtain their ob-
jectives: the shaft speed controller keeps the shaft speed
most constant, the torque controller keeps the motor torque
most constant, and the power controller keeps the motor
power most constant.
As the advance speed increases,
the effective angle of attack of the propeller blades is de-
creased, and the propeller loading decreases for a constant
shaft speed. This can be seen in terms of reduced propeller
thrust and torque at increasing advance velocities for the

--- PAGE 10 ---
0
50
100
Ta [N]
0
2
4
Qa [Nm]
7
8
9
n [1/s]
1
2
3
4
5
Qm [Nm]
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
50
100
150
200
250
Pm [W]
Va [m/s]
Torque control
Power control
Shaft speed control
Figure 5: Comparison of propeller thrust Ta, torque Qa,
shaft speed n, motor torque Qm and power Pm for the shaft
speed, torque and power controllers in varying advance ve-
locities Va.
shaft speed controller: at Va = 1.5 m/s, the propeller thrust
is reduced from 100 N to 18 N. The torque and power con-
trollers have much better performance, since the controllers
increase the shaft speed as the propeller loading decreases:
at Va = 1.5 m/s, the propeller thrust is reduced from 100 N
to 65 N and 50 N respectively.
7.3
Dynamic Tests in Waves
To validate the dynamic performance of the controllers
when subject to rapidly changing inﬂow to the propeller
a total of 34 tests in regular and irregular waves were per-
formed. The thrust reference was Tr = 90 N and the car-
riage was kept stationary. A comparison of the controller
performance in regular waves with wave height 8 cm and
period 1 s is shown in Figure 6. The results are summarized
in the following:
• The shaft speed controller keeps the shaft speed con-
stant, and has to vary the motor torque and power in
6.7
6.8
6.9
7
n [rps]
85
90
95
Ta [N]
3.4
3.6
3.8
Qa [Nm]
4.6
4.8
5
Qm [Nm]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
205
210
215
Pm [W]
Time [s]
Torque control
Power control
Shaft speed control
Figure 6: Comparison of shaft speed, torque, and power
control in regular waves.
order to achieve this. The resulting propeller thrust
and torque have the largest variance.
• The torque controller keeps the motor torque constant,
and as a result the shaft speed varies with the load-
ing. The resulting propeller thrust and torque have the
smallest variance.
• The power controller keeps the motor power constant,
and as a result both the shaft speed and motor torque
varies with the loading. The resulting propeller thrust
and torque lie between the shaft speed and torque con-
troller values.
Tests with time-varying thrust reference trajectories are
presented in Smogeli (2006) and Sørensen and Smogeli
(2009).
7.4
Anti-spin Tests
The anti-spin control scheme was tested in a variety of op-
erating conditions: for constant and time-varying thrust ref-
erences, in waves, with a calm free surface and forced ver-
tical motion of varying amplitude Av, period Tv, and mean
submergence h0, and in combinations of waves and verti-
cal motion. In the results presented here, the thrust refer-
ence was kept constant during forced vertical motion with

--- PAGE 11 ---
a calm free surface. This improved repeatability and en-
abled comparison of the various controllers, since the time
series could be synchronized by comparing the relative ver-
tical motion of the propeller. Because of the chaotic nature
of ventilation, the actual operational conditions for the pro-
peller vary from one test run to another. However, the re-
peatability is in general good. The results presented below
are for h0 = 15cm, Av = 15cm, and Tv = 5s. Perfor-
mance comparisons in other conditions, further validating
the robust performance of the anti-spin controller, are pre-
sented in Smogeli (2006).
Figure 7 shows comparisons of the thrust Ta, propeller
torque Qa, shaft speed n, motor torque Qm, and motor
power Pm for four different thruster controllers during a
ventilation incident with Tr = 200N. The ventilation in-
cident starts at t ≈11.2s, and terminates at t ≈14.5s.
The compared controllers are shaft speed PI control (20),
torque control (21), power control (24), and the proposed
anti-spin controller based on combined torque/power con-
trol (25). With anti-spin activated, both the primary (31)
and the secondary (33) anti-spin actions were used. The
time series show that the torque controller and the power
controller both lead to propeller racing. The shaft speed
controller and the anti-spin controller limit the shaft speed
as intended, with the secondary anti-spin action giving a
slightly reduced shaft speed during ventilation. The result-
ing thrust during ventilation is about the same for all con-
trollers. That is, the anti-spin controller, which reduces the
shaft speed to 9rps during ventilation, produces the same
thrust as the torque controller, which races to the imposed
limit of 25rps. This corresponds well to the experimental
results shown in Fig. 1. The power consumption of the
torque controller is unacceptably high, whereas the power
controller keeps the power consumption limited. The shaft
speed and anti-spin controllers give a lower power con-
sumption during ventilation, but this is not considered to
be a problem.
Figure 8 shows comparisons of Ta, Qa, n, Qm, and Pm
for four controllers during a ventilation incident with Tr =
300N: power control, combined control with primary anti-
spin action only (marked P), combined control with pri-
mary and secondary anti-spin action (marked P+S), and
shaft speed control. The torque controller could not be
tested for this thrust reference, since the propeller racing
was too severe to give sensible results. The ventilation in-
cident starts at t ≈16.2s, and terminates at t ≈19.5s.
Again, the thrust levels during ventilation are almost iden-
tical for all the controllers. It can be noted that the primary
anti-spin controller and the shaft speed controller behave
almost identically, conﬁrming that the proposed anti-spin
controller has a similar performance as a well-tuned shaft
speed PI controller during ventilation. The secondary anti-
spin action lowers the shaft speed as intended during venti-
lation. Figure 9 shows details from the anti-spin controller
10
15
20
25
n [1/s]
 
50
100
150
200
Ta [N]
1
2
3
4
5
Qa [Nm]
3
4
5
6
Qm [Nm]
11
12
13
14
15
200
400
600
800
Pm [W]
Time [s]
Torque control
Power control
Combined control with antispin P+S
Shaft speed control
Figure 7: Comparison of four controllers during a ventila-
tion incident at Tr = 200N.
during a ventilation incident: propeller torque Qa versus
estimated propeller torque ˆQa, estimated torque loss factor
ˆβQ and ventilation detection signal ζ, torque modiﬁcation
factor γ, deviation of γ from the measured βQ, and the de-
sired shaft speed nras. The time series show that the anti-
spin controller, including torque observer and ventilation
detection, performs as intended.
8
CONCLUSIONS
Low-level controllers based on shaft speed, torque, and
power control for electrically driven thrusters on vessels
in normal operating conditions have been investigated, and
evaluated according to three main performance criteria.
The conventional shaft speed controller gave the thrust,
torque, and power with the largest variance, and it was
the least robust to disturbances in the in-line ﬂow veloc-
ity. The torque controller produced the thrust and torque
with the smallest variance, and was superior with respect
to compensating for thrust losses due to disturbances in the
inﬂow. The power controller gave the least oscillations in
the power, with the resulting propeller thrust and torque
in-between the shaft speed and torque controller values.
The combined torque and power controller gave the over-
all best improvement in the performance from low to high
loadings. Steady-state sensitivity functions describing the

--- PAGE 12 ---
10
15
20
25
n [1/s]
 
0
100
200
300
Ta [N]
2
4
6
Qa [Nm]
2
4
6
8
Qm [Nm]
15
16
17
18
19
20
200
400
600
800
Pm [W]
Time [s]
Power control
Combined control with antispin P
Combined control with antispin P+S
Shaft speed control
Figure 8: Comparison of four controllers during a ventila-
tion incident at Tr = 300N.
0
2
4
6
Q [Nm]
Qa
Qa
0
0.5
1
βQ, ζ [−]
βQ
ζ
0.5
1
γ [−]
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
γ − βQ [−]
0
1
2
3
4
5
10
12
nras [1/s]
Time [s]
Figure 9: Time series of the main parameters in the anti-
spin control law with primary and secondary control action
during a ventilation incident at Tr = 300N.
performance of the various controllers in terms of result-
ing thrust, shaft speed, torque, and power when subject to
thrust losses were presented. Experiments illustrated the
difference in performance and robustness of the different
controllers.
It has been shown that torque and power control is a fea-
sible solution for high-performance thruster control only
if special precautions are taken during extreme environ-
mental conditions, when the propeller may be subject to
ventilation and in-and-out-of water effects. To solve this
problem, an anti-spin thruster controller has been designed.
The thruster performance was monitored by a load torque
observer, and the anti-spin controller was triggered by a
ventilation detection scheme. The anti-spin controller took
control of and lowered the shaft speed. Experiments with a
model scale propeller were presented. The results showed
that the torque and power controllers with anti-spin had
comparable performance to that of a well-tuned shaft speed
PI controller during ventilation, without compromising the
superior performance of torque and power control in nor-
mal conditions.
9
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been carried out at the Centre for Ships
and Ocean Structures (CeSOS) at NTNU in cooperation
with the research project Energy-Efﬁcient All-Electric Ship
(EEAES). The Research Council of Norway is acknowl-
edged as the main sponsor of CeSOS and EEAES.
REFERENCES
Bachmayer, R., Whitcomb, L. L., and Grosenbaugh, M. A.
(2000). An Accurate Four-Quadrant Nonlinear Dynami-
cal Model for Marine Thrusters: Theory and Experimen-
tal Validation. IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engineering,
25(1):146–159.
Bakkeheim, J., Johansen, T. A., Smogeli, O. N., and
Sørensen, A. J. (2008). Lyapunov-based Integrator Re-
setting with Application to Marine Thruster Control.
IEEE Trans. Control Systems Technology. Accepted for
publication.
Blanke, M. (1994).
Optimal Speed Control for Cruis-
ing. In Proc. 3rd IFAC Conference on Manoeuvring and
Control of Marine Craft (MCMC’94), pages 125–134,
Southampton, UK.
Blanke, M. and Busk Nielsen, P. (1987).
Electronic
Governor Control for two stroke Engines. In Nordisk
Sj¨ofartsteknisk ˚Arsbok – Svensk Sj¨ofarts Tidning, vol-
ume 40, pages 82–84.
Blanke, M. and Busk Nielsen, P. (1990). The Marine En-
gine Governor.
In Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. on Maritime
Communications and Control, pages 11–20, London,
UK.

--- PAGE 13 ---
Blanke, M., Pivano, L., and Johansen, T. (2007). An Ef-
ﬁciency Optimizing Propeller Speed Control for Ships
in Moderate Seas - Model Experiments and Simulation.
In Proc. IFAC Conference on Control Applications in
Marine Systems (CAMS’07), Bol Croatia.
Brix, J. (1978).
Querstrahlsteuer.
Forschungzentrum
des Deutschen Schiffbaus, Bericht Nr. 80. In German.
“Steering with Lateral Thrusters”.
Chislett, M. S. and Bj¨orheden, O. (1966).
Inﬂuence of
Ship Speed on the Effectiveness of aLateral-Thrust Unit.
Hydro- og Aerodynamisk Laboratorium Report No Hy-
8, Lyngby, Denmark.
Faltinsen, O. M., Minsaas, K. J., Liapis, N., and Skjørdal,
S. O. (1980). Prediction of resistance and propulsion
of a ship in a seaway. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth
Symposium on Naval Hydrodynamics, Tokyo.
Fossen, T. I. and Blanke, M. (2000).
Nonlinear Out-
put Feedback Control of Underwater Vehicle Propellers
Using Feedback From Estimated Axial Flow Velocity.
IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engineering, 25(2):241–255.
Haskara, I., ¨Ozg¨uner, U., and Winkelman, J. (2000). Wheel
Slip Control for Antispin Acceleration via Dynamic
Spark Advance. Control Engineering Practice, 8:1135–
1148.
Healey, A. J., Rock, S. M., Cody., S., Miles, D., and
Brown, J. P. (1995).
Toward an improved under-
standing of thruster dynamics for underwater vehicles.
IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engineering, 29(4):354–361.
Hespanha, J. P. and Morse, A. S. (2002). Switching be-
tween stabilizing controllers. Automatica, 38(11):1905–
1917.
Koushan, K. (2004). Environmental and Interaction Effects
on Propulsion Systems used in Dynamic Positioning, an
Overview. In Proc. 9th Int. Symp. Practical Design of
Ships and Other Floating Structures (PRADS’04), pages
1013–1020, L¨ubeck-Travem¨unde, Germany.
Lehn, E. (1992). FPS-2000 Mooring and Positioning, Part
1.6 Dynamic Positioning - Thruster Efﬁciency: Practical
Methods for Estimation of Thrust Losses. Technical Re-
port 513003.00.06, Marintek, SINTEF, Trondheim, Nor-
way.
Leonhard,
W.
(1996).
Control of Electrical Drives.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2nd edition.
Minsaas, K. J., Thon, H. J., and Kauczynski, W. (1987).
Estimation of Required Thruster Capacity for Operation
of Offshore Vessels under Severe Weather Conditions.
In Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Practical Design of Ship and
Mobile Units (PRADS’87), pages 411–427, Trondheim,
Norway.
Olofsson, N. (1996). Force and Flow Characteristics of
a Partially Submerged Propeller. PhD thesis, Chalmers
University of Technology, G¨oteborg, Sweden.
Pivano, L. (2008).
Thrust Estimation and Control of
Marine Propellers in Four-Quadrant Operations. PhD
thesis, Department of Engineering Cybernetics, Norwe-
gian University of Science and Technology (NTNU),
Thesis 2008:20, Trondheim, Norway.
Ruth, E. (2008). Propulsion Control and Thrust Allocation
on Marine Vessels. PhD thesis, Department of Marine
Technology, Norwegian University of Science and Tech-
nology (NTNU), Thesis 2008:203, Trondheim, Norway.
Ruth, E. and Smogeli, Ø. N. (2006). Ventilation of Con-
trollable Pitch Thrusters. SNAME Marine Technology,
43(4):170–179.
Ruth, E., Smogeli, Ø. N., and Sørensen, A. J. (2006).
Overview of Propulsion Control for Surface Vessels. In
Proc. 7th IFAC Conference on Manoeuvring and Control
of Marine Craft (MCMC’06), Lisbon, Portugal.
Shiba, H. (1953). Air-Drawing of Marine Propellers. In
Report of Transportation Technical Research Institute,
The Unyu-Gijutsu Kenkyujo, Japan.
Smogeli, Ø. N. (2006). Control of Marine Propellers: from
Normal to Extreme Conditions. PhD thesis, Department
of Marine Technology, Norwegian University of Science
and Technology (NTNU), Thesis 2006:187, Trondheim,
Norway.
Smogeli, Ø. N., Aarseth, L., Over˚a, E. S., Sørensen, A. J.,
and Minsaas, K. J. (2003). Anti-spin Thruster Control
in Extreme Seas.
In Proc. 6th IFAC Conference on
Manoeuvring and Control of Marine Craft (MCMC’03),
pages 221–226, Girona, Spain.
Smogeli, Ø. N., Hansen, J., Sørensen, A. J., and Johansen,
T. A. (2004a). Anti-Spin Control for Marine Propulsion
Systems. In Proc. 43rd IEEE Conference on Decision
and Control (CDC’04), Paradise Island, Bahamas.
Smogeli, Ø. N., Ruth, E., and Sørensen, A. J. (2005).
Experimental Validation of Power and Torque Thruster
Control. In Proc. Mediterranean Conference on Control
and Automation (MED’05), Limassol, Cyprus.
Smogeli, Ø. N. and Sørensen, A. J. (2009).
Anti-Spin
Thruster Control for Ships.
IEEE Transactions on
Control Systems Technology. Accepted for publication.

--- PAGE 14 ---
Smogeli, Ø. N., Sørensen, A. J., and Fossen, T. I. (2004b).
Design of a Hybrid Power/Torque Thruster Controller
with Thrust Loss Estimation. In Proc. IFAC Conference
on Control Applications in Marine Systems (CAMS’04),
Ancona, Italy.
Smogeli, Ø. N., Sørensen, A. J., and Minsaas, K. J. (2008).
The Concept of Anti-Spin Thruster Control.
Control
Engineering Practice, 16(4):465–481.
Sørensen, A. J. (2005). Structural Issues in the Design and
Operation of Marine Control Systems. IFAC Journal of
Annual Reviews in Control, 29(1):125–149.
Sørensen, A. J., ˚Adnanes, A. K., Fossen, T. I., and Strand,
J. P. (1997). A New Method of Thruster Control in Po-
sitioning of Ships based on Power Control.
In Proc.
4th IFAC Conference on Manoeuvring and Control of
Marine Craft (MCMC’97), Brijuni, Croatia.
Sørensen, A. J. and Smogeli, Ø. N. (2009). Torque and
Power Control of Electrically Driven Marine Propellers
with Experimental Validation.
Control Engineering
Practice. Accepted for publication.
Whitcomb, L. L. and Yoerger, D. R. (1999a).
De-
velopment, Comparison, and Preliminary Experimen-
tal Validation of Nonlinear Dynamic Thruster Models.
IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engineering, 24(4):481–494.
Whitcomb, L. L. and Yoerger, D. R. (1999b). Preliminary
Experiments in Model-Based Thruster Control for Un-
derwater Vehicle Positioning. IEEE Journal of Oceanic
Engineering, 24(4):495–506.
Yoerger, D. R., Cooke, J. G., and Slotine, J. J. E. (1991).
The Inﬂuence of Thruster Dynamics on Underwater Ve-
hicle Behavior and Their Incorporation Into Control Sys-
tem Design.
IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engineering,
15(3):167–179.

